But I think we are actually
a collection of interacting
perspectives and interacting consciousnesses.
And you know, then sometimes people say, well,
I don't feel my liver being conscious.
Right, you don't, but you don't feel me
being conscious either.
Of course you don't.
And the fact that your left hemisphere has
the language ability for us to sit here and
talk about it and the liver doesn't, doesn't
actually mean that it's not conscious.
It just means that we don't have direct access
to it, and we don't have direct access to
each other.
So that doesn't, that doesn't bother me.
So I, that's, that's my suspicion about, about
consciousness is that for the same reason
that people think it's in the brain, we should
take very seriously that it's in other places
in the body.
And then, and then more, more generally,
you know, other, other types of constructs that
are not human bodies at all, or not even
animal bodies.
We've spoken
to Bernardo Kastrup several times now.
What is it you agree with him the most
that you think most people would disagree about?
Because you agree with him that it's nice to go
for a walk.
Okay, sure.
But most people agree it's nice to go for a walk.
So what is it that you agree with him about that
you think is a contentious issue to most
people?
So this isn't, this is a controversial statement.
And then what is it you disagree with
him about regarding consciousness?
Yeah, boy, I don't, you know, it's hard for
me to know what most people agree or disagree
with him about.
I really don't know.
We agree on a lot of things.
We agree on, I think, the
primacy of consciousness.
I think that, you know, his idealist
position has a lot of, a lot to recommend it.
One thing I think we disagree on
is the issue of compositionality.
So if I recall correctly from a talk that
we had together a little while ago, he felt
that it is important in order to be a true
self, to be a, to be, to, to have a conscious
experience as an inner perspective.
You have to be, you know, he focuses
on the view of embryonic development as a single
system that, you know, whatever subdivides and
develops, but it, but it starts out as
a single system.
And I was arguing that that really is
just a, a contingent feature of biology.
I mean, we certainly can take two, two
early embryos and mush them together.
You get a perfectly normal,
you know, embryo out of it.
And in general, there are lots of biological
systems like our, our xenobots, like, like
anthrobots that you can, you can create by
composition, by pulling other things together.
So I don't give as much, I don't put as much
emphasis on a system being demarcated from
the outside world because it was somehow,
because it started out that way and it sort
of remained, you know, disconnected.
I think those are, I think that's kind of
a superficial aspect of the biology and you
can do things a different way.
I don't think that's what,
what's responsible for it.
But, but he, you know, I, I, yeah, I think,
I think he thinks it's important that, that
individual selves are not compositions,
they're not made as compositions.
They're somehow, you know, individualized
from the word go, which again, even the egg,
right?
So, so we, I mean, we, we, humans like eggs
because we can see it as a distinct little
thing with a membrane.
We can say, ah, there's a,
you know, an individual,
but, but, but even an egg is composed by the
maternal organism from molecular components.
Like I, I see, I see no, no point at which
any of this is, is truly distinct from, from
anything else.
So, so I put less emphasis on it,
but I, but I think he thinks it's important.
It seems like the point that you're saying is,
look, we can think about this as several
rooms.
This building comprises several rooms, but
even in, and Bernardo may say, that's what
makes a person is the distinct rooms, but
you're saying, yeah, but even in a room, there
are different people.
There are different chairs.
There are different tables.
Is that what you're saying?
What I'm saying is, and, and I, you know,
I may not be doing justice to his view, and
I think, I think you should ask him more about
this, but, um, I think he thinks that it's
important in order to be a unified, so, so
I think we were discussing what makes for
a unified inner perspective, right?
So, so we don't feel like, uh,
billions of individual brain cells.
I mean, I have no idea why, well, we kind
of do because that's what it feels like to
be billions of individual set of neurons.
That's really what it feels like, but, um,
but we do feel at least most of us, most of
the time, feel like some kind of unified,
centralized inner perspective, and so we were
talking about how that comes about,
and I think he felt that having that in, in the
physical universe is, uh, importantly related to,
um, arising from a single origin, a single,
so he sees the egg as a single point of origin,
and, and arising from that, that's how you
are a separate individual from others,
and I see it as much more fluid, and I see the
boundary between self and world as
something that can change all the time.
I think it changes in embryogenesis, and that's
the scale of, that's the story of the scaling
of the cognitive licon that we talked about.
I think it can shrink during cancer, uh, I
think it can change during metamorphosis,
during maturation, um, I, I think, I
think it's much more fluid than that.
Now, as we're on speculative ground, if what
makes an agent is the distinction between
the self and the world, and some people think
of God as the entirety of everything, thus
the entire world, and there's no distinction,
then can one say that God is an agent?
I, I don't know, I, I mean, certainly I think
most, uh, well, religions that have a, that
have a God, anyway, as far as my understanding
is, they would think that, yes, that God has,
uh, extreme agency, in fact,
higher than, than ours.
I, I, I don't know what that really buys us,
um, you know, in any, in any, uh, helpful
way.
Um,
remove the word God, does the world have agency?
Okay, so, so that's an interesting question.
So, so let's start with, first of all,
how do we know when anything has agency?
And that's an, that's an
experimental research program.
So you basically, you hypothesize what, uh,
problem space it's working in, what you think
its goals are, and then you do experiments
to figure out what competency it has, and
then you find out, did I guess well, poorly,
do I need to make a better guess, and so on.
So, uh, for example, um, uh, people have
said, uh, to me, well, you know, your kind
of, uh, panpsychist, uh, almost view says that
the weather should be, you know, cognitive,
and I, you know, I, I say, uh, I don't say
that it is or isn't because we haven't done
the experiments.
Do I know that, uh, weather systems, let's
say, let's say hurricanes or so on, do I know
that they don't show habituation sensitization,
that they couldn't be trained if you had the
right, uh, scale of, of machinery?
I have no idea.
But what I do know is that it's not a,
um, this is not a philosophical, uh, thing that
we can decide arguing in an armchair.
Yes, it is.
No, it isn't.
No, you have to do experiments,
and then you find out.
So, now, the question is, okay, so
what about, you know, the galaxy?
What about the universe?
Right?
Are these the, you know, Gaia, um, ecosystems?
Again, I think these are all empirical questions.
Now, some of them are intractable, you know, we
don't have the capability to do, um, experiments
on a, uh, on a, on a planetary scale, but
for example, one thing that I did try to do
once was design a gravitational synapse,
so design a solar system size arrangement
where masses would fly in, and based on the
history of masses flying in, it would respond
to new masses in a different way.
So, you can do, you know, historicity,
and you can have habituation and sensitization
and things like that.
So, could, could you have something like that
that would be very, sort of, ponderously slowly
on an enormous scale, computing something and
having, you know, sort of simple thoughts?
I bet you could.
You know, I bet you could.
Um, is the real universe doing that?
I have no idea.
You'd have to do experiments.
So, so, you know, here, here, you
bump up against another question, which is, how do
you know if, if, and when you are part of a larger
cognitive system?
Right?
So, so I don't, you know, how do we know if
we are, in fact, part of a bigger, a bigger
mind?
So, I, I don't know.
Um, and my suspicion is that there are some
sort of Gödel-like theorem that will tell
you that you can never know for sure, uh,
and you can, you can, you know, you can never
be certain, but I bet that you could gather
evidence for it, well, for or against.
And I often think about, um, a kind of a, um,
uh, uh, you know, kind of a mental, mental
image.
Just imagine
two neurons in the brain and one is
a, is a, you know, kind of a, kind
of a strict materialist and
one's a little more mystical.
And the one neuron says, look, uh, you know,
we're, we're, we're just, we just run on chemistry
and the outside world is a cold
mechanical universe and it doesn't.
care what we do. There's no mind outside of us.
And the other one says, I can't prove it, but I
kind of feel like there's an order to things. And
I kind of feel like our environment is not stupid.
I kind of feel like our environment wants things
from us. And I kind of feel these waves of, you
know, these waves backpropagating through us that
are like almost rewards and punishments. I feel
like the universe is trying to tell us something.
And the first one says, yeah, you're just seeing,
you know, faces and clouds. It doesn't exist.
And of course, in my example, the second one is
correct because they are in fact part of a larger
system. They're part of a brain that is learning
things. And it's very hard for any one node in
that system to recognize that or even a sub, you
know, sub network. But I wonder if we
could, uh, having, having a, you know,
a degree of intelligence
ourselves, if we could gain
evidence that we were part of a
larger system that was actually
processing information. And I don't, I don't know
exactly what that would look like, but my hunch
is that it would look like what we call
synchronicity. I think that what it would look
like are, um, coincidence, our events that don't
have a, uh, causal connection at our lower level,
like, like mechanistically, like by physics,
there's no reason why that should be, but at a
larger scale in terms of meaning and, um, uh, you
know, grant grant grant the greater meanings of
things that, that they do have some kind of
interpretation. And I think that's what it would
look like to be part of a larger system. I
think it would look, it would look and feel like
synchronicity. So does it exist either? You know,
I don't know, but that that's what I think it
would feel like. If you enjoyed this TOE clipping,
then the full video is linked in the description.
You should also sign up for TOEmail, which is
again in the description and the pinned comment,
you'll receive immediate access to all exclusive
updates from the theories of everything podcast.
It also helps me communicate directly with the
core TOE community. You'll also receive my top 10
TOEs. Think of it as the intellectual
version of Quentin Tarantino's obsession.